gusty day with the worst of the wind
in the morning and then into the
evening and overnight the winds will
strengthen, rain pushes in which
takes us into the Outlook. More rain
on Saturday before brightening later
in the day, sunshine and showers on
Sunday. Nick
Miller has Hello, September was a
drier than average month across some
parts of the UK, it’s October now
and here comes the rain. Initially
from this area of low pressure,
named Storm Alex by the French
weather service but parts of the UK
are about to see heavy rain and
strong winds from it. To start
Friday across much of southern
England and South Wales and the rain
England and South Walas and the rain
will push
England and South Wales and the rain
will push northwards across Wales,
will push northwards across Walas,
into the
will push northwards across Wales,
into the Midlands and East Anglia is
the day goes on. That is cleared
from parts of southern England to
showers. Strong easterly winds
showers. Strong easterty winds
gusting
showers. Strong easterly winds
gusting around the coasts of
south—west England, may be in excess
south-west England, may be in excess
of 60
south—west England, may be in excess
of 60 miles an hour, in the Channel
of 60 mils an hour, in the Channel
Islands
of 60 miles an hour, in the Channel
Islands close to 70 miles an hour,
Islands dose to 70 mils an hour,
disruptive and
Islands close to 70 miles an hour,
disruptive and damaging. Friday, in
Scotland and Northern Ireland, a
chilly start, showery rain easing
and many others find with southern
spells. For Northern England the
touch of frost, patchy fog, the
further south you are rain
developing into the afternoon.
Further rain overnight and into
Saturday across parts of England and
Walas.
Wales. If anything the
north—easterly wind will strengthen
north-easterty wind will strengthen
more widely
north—easterly wind will strengthen
more widely and look how more
widespread the rain is on Saturday.
At this stage pushing east to west
across Scotland into Northern
Ireland to end the day, many click
Ireland to end the day, many dick
-- it made
Ireland to end the day, many click
—— it made clear parts of East
-- it made clear parts of East
Anglia and
—— it made clear parts of East
Anglia and gales running down into
Anglia and gals mnning down into
the
Anglia and gales running down into
the Channel Islands. With more rain
the Channel Islands. with more rain
to come
the Channel Islands. With more rain
to come for some of us on Sunday the
Welcome to the opening night
of Strictly: The Best Of Musicals.
It’s time to razzle dazzle.
It’s like bringing a whole new
world to the Strictly dance floor.
Sequins, glitter and sparkle.
Strictly: The Best Of Musicals.
It’s undignified to
hold on to the sleeve of someone
who wants to leave.
My bag! It’s on the train!
Do you know where Douglas is now?
No idea.
Doesn’t seem right.
If you want something that much, you
ought to get it, don’t you think?
Would I be able to borrow some cash?
Of course it’s a worry. I want to
have a family one day, innit, so...
Me and Ben are brothers, both with
problems with our testicles.
Itjust goes to show how common
fertility issues are in men.
No man should
take his fertility for granted.
TYRES SCREECH
What a weapon!
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Grant Shapps,
appointed by Boris
appointed by BorisJohnson when he
appointed by Boris johnson when he
became
appointed by BorisJohnson when he
became leader, formerly co—chairman
became leader, formerty co-chairman
of the party
became leader, formerly co—chairman
of the party under David Cameron.
Labour’s shadow sport minister
eluted
elected in 2010, a backbencher under
eluted in 2010, a backbencher under
jeremy Corbyn
elected in 2010, a backbencher under
Jeremy Corbyn are now a member of
jeremy Corbyn are now a member of
Keir
Jeremy Corbyn are now a member of
Keir Starmer’s front bench, Alison
McGovern. David Linden, an
apprentice who left school at 16 and
became leader of the youth wing of
the SNP before being elected to
Westminster three years ago. Joining
Westminster three years ago. joining
us down
Westminster three years ago. Joining
us down the line, Helen
Stokes—Lampard, a practising GP and
Stokes-lampard, a practising GP and
chair of
Stokes—Lampard, a practising GP and
chair of the Academy of Medical
Royal Colleges. And one of the
countrrs
country’s most successful retailers,
countrrs most successful retailers,
chair of
country’s most successful retailers,
chair of the online grocery
chair of the online grocery brand
Orado,
Ocado, former chief executive of
Orado, former chief executive of
Marks 5.
Ocado, former chief executive of
Marks & Spencer, Conservative peer
Marks 5. Spencer, Conservative peer
Stuart
Marks & Spencer, Conservative peer
Stuart Rose.
APPLAUSE
Good evening, welcome to my guests
here in the studio and to Helen,
who isjoining us down the line.
Welcome, Helen.
And we have a live audience with us,
in the way we’ve become
accustomed to by now,
via video link.
Tonight, you are all in Carlisle
or in the Carlisle area.
So, hello, good to see you,
very good to have you with us.
Thank you forjoining us.
And, of course, to you at home,
you canjoin in the conversation
as well in the way you know,
on social media at bbcquestiontime.
So let’s hear what you
have to say, as well.
OK, let’s start with our
first question tonight,
which is from David Ewing.
Good evening, Fiona,
and welcome to Carlisle.
Has the time come for the UK
to adopt the Australian policy
of processing illegal asylum seekers
outside of UK waters?
So, there’s been a bit
of talk about this today.
Plans, blue sky thinking, I’m not
sure what, from the Government.
We’ll come to you,
Grant, in a moment.
Alison?
I think we’re a bit fed up
of having policies that
are pulled out of a hat
by the Conservative party almost...
You know, some of these ideas that
are being suggested that risk
being really inhumane,
that are being trailed almost
to get people stirred up.
I think we’ve had enough of that
and what we actually
need is a decent policy,
where we treat people
properly who have suffered,
you know, in conflict,
in the worst situations
in the world and we have...
What is it particularly that
you are objecting to in the ideas
that have been mooted?
In terms of potentially government
policy regarding asylum seekers?
David’s question, I think,
refers to some of the ideas that
have been trailed in the media,
that then later kind of get
abandoned, about islands 4000
miles away or offshore,
you know, centres,
to receive people.
Labour did suggest something
similar under Blair,
processing people in
Tanzania, for example?
Ithink...
Take, for example, what’s happened
with European refugees,
for example in Calais,
where the Home Office could have
more proactively sent officials,
could have worked harder to get
people who are pretty vulnerable
dealt with in a proper way
and they consistently
haven’t done so.
There are whole issues around
the underfunding of border force
that I worry risks our security
and that’s happened over
the past ten years.
But what really worries me
about what we’re hearing
in the press all the time is sort
of I almost suspect it’s a bit
of a distraction technique.
You know, the Government’s having
problems so they come up
with another one of these ideas
to get people stirred up.
I don’t think we should do that.
I think they should put forward
a proper set of policies,
we’ll scrutinise them based
on their merits and we should
have an immigration policy that way.
Ishould mention, David,
you referred to them
as illegal immigration.
If people are claiming asylum,
they are not illegal yet.
It depends on what decision is taken
regarding their status.
Stuart?
Well, listen, this is a very modern
dilemma but, of course,
it isn’t a modern dilemma,
it’s been around for
hundreds of years.
This country has always
been the place that
people want to come to.
We’ve been accepting people
here on a migratory basis
for hundreds of years,
whether it’s the Huguenots
or the people escaping the pale
of Russia and we’ve always been
a home to these people.
We’ve got a physical problem
because they are coming over.
We’ve got a legal problem
because you can’tjust deport them
and you have got a moral problem
because we have a moral obligation,
I think, in this world, as a very
civilised and very rich country,
to be able to help these people.
On the physical side,
that is not going to go away
so we have to think about how
we mitigate the problems and how
we do deter people from coming
here and how we negotiate
with our European colleagues
about perhaps sharing the load
and have better ways of stopping
people make that perilous journey.
On the legal front,
when people are here,
they have certain rights
and we must uphold those
rights and then...
So what do you think about the idea,
David’s question is about processing
these people not on UK soil?
I don’t know who it was in the House
of Commons today but I very much
agree with what she said,
this is the most bonkers
idea I’ve ever heard.
I think the idea of actually
bringing people in and shipping them
off to St Helena or putting them
on used ships, used
ferries in the North See
or the Irish Sea is preposterous.
I think it is inhumane.
I don’t think it would work.
They’ve got to be fed.
They’ve got to be clothed,
they’ve got to be educated,
they’ve got to be looked after,
how are you going to do that?
Is it bonkers, did you think it was
bonkers when you read about this
idea about Ascension?
First of all, the agreement stuff
and we’ve got a long and proud
history as a country of people
coming here and seeking refuge,
including my family
some generations ago.
And I think that Britain should be
proud of that but we also have
to accept that we have an issue
with the illegal gangs
running criminal outfits,
bringing people over across a very,
very dangerous crossing
in tiny boats.
That’s the issue that
needs to be dealt with.
But is sending people to Ascension
island the way of dealing with it?
So any responsible government would,
of course, have a look at how other
countries are dealing with these
things and have dealt with them
successfully and look
at a variety of different ideas.
But I have to say at this stage,
Alison says, I’m sick and tired
of reading things in the newspaper.
Well, you and I both
because you read all sorts of stuff
in the newspaper and usually it’s
not government policy
or anything of the sort.
You’re giving a briefing...
Let’s just...
Grant, just clarify for us.
Hang on, we’ve all read...
People think somehow
this is deliberate.
No, newspapers have to actually
write stuff, they write stuff
and then you have to respond.
But at this point in time,
none of this is a policy.
When it is, of course, someone
will come out and confirm it.
But were these things,
some of these things
actually discussed, then,
the idea of this sort of magic wave
machine that would send the boats
back by creating waves?
That was actually
discussed in a meeting?
Not to my knowledge.
Or sending people to Moldova?
Look...
I’ve not been to meetings
about those things at all.
Oil rigs?
But you must know.
I’m sure you’ve been briefed before
you came on tonight,
were those things discussed?
I can honestly say I’ve never been
in a meeting about any
of those things at all.
But what is true and what is quite
proper is we have to deal
with the criminal gangs.
It’s a disgusting people trafficking
exploitation that’s going on,
that puts people’s lives at risk
and actually as that humane country
that I described at first,
of course we should look
at if there are better ways we can
help with the situation.
One of the things is not to turn
a blind eye and enable these
gangs to bring very,
very vulnerable people
to our shores, some of whom’s lives
have been put at risk along the way.
So is the Government is serious...
First it was the subject of leak
and then it was confirmed this
was something the Government
was thinking about, how
to deal with migrants
coming over the Channel.
Is this something we’re likely,
is this a serious proposition
by the Government, off shoring
asylum seekers and processing
them off British soil?
Well, as I say, I can’t comment
on speculation in newspapers
but I can absolutely...
I’m asking you if that
is a government idea?
I can absolutely confirm
the Government is quite rightly
and properly looking at and thinking
through all the possible different
ways to prevent people from actually
dying in the Channel.
And these gangs trafficking people.
If we weren’t doing that,
you would be asking
on earth we weren’t.
David?
Fiona, this is
absolutely astonishing.
The Secretary of State
for Transport, which last time
I checked include boats,
doesn’t seem to know whether or not
the Government has a plan to put
asylum seekers on boats.
One of the things I see in myjob
as the MP for Glasgow East
is a really high asylum case load.
I’ve got to say that the people
who come to these islands to seek
asylum are some of the most
vulnerable people in the world.
People who are fleeing war,
sexual violence, famine, persecution
because of their sexuality
and the way that the British
government treat asylum seekers
within the Home Office system
is absolutely despicable
at the best of times.
And the fact that the UK Government
can’t rule this out right now really
does indicate that they do
want to treat people like some sort
of cattle prodding or some sort
of penal colony.
What I’d like the Secretary of State
to rule out right now is this idea
that they would use Scottish islands
as some way of processing
asylum seekers.
I don’t know if Grant can take that
opportunity right now
because if he can’t,
that would be deeply alarming.
First of all, I ought to take
the opportunity to correct
something you’ve just said,
which is of course people come
here fleeing terrible
persecution and Britain,
as I said and has been commented on,
has a proud reputation of bringing
people in and thousands of people
making new lives here.
But you just described it
as if somebody in France
is being persecuted and, actually,
France is a freedom loving country
as well, where people
are already within the EU.
So I think it’s just very important
to be careful and cautious
with our language here and not try
and present a situation
which is inflammatory.
Well, I find it very difficult
to take lectures about careful
and cautious language
from a government that has
the hostile environment.
Every single day in my constituency
casework, I see some of the most
vulnerable people in the world
being messed about by
the Home Office, left
in substandard accommodation
because the Home Office don’t care
and this is just the latest example
of really irresponsible policy
from the British government,
which has no care whatsoever
for some of the most vulnerable
people coming to this country.
Let me see what our audience think.
David?
You asked the question.
We all want to be a country that
does give protection
to those who need it.
My father’s side of the family
was given refuge in this country
from the Spanish Civil War.
The point is, these people
are coming here illegally
from the safe haven of France.
You know...
They are not all coming
illegally, David.
I’m sorry tojump in but they’re not
all coming in illegally, no.
If it’s a legal application to join
the UK, that’s fine.
But don’t forget, these people
are going through Europe,
they’re going through Spain,
Greece, Italy, France.
Nobody’s yet explained to me
why the camps in France
are still in position.
I don’t understand that.
Why aren’t those asylum applications
being processed in France
or being processed in Greece,
or being processed in Spain?
Or Italy?
I don’t understand that, really,
and it’s been like this
for quite some time.
And whilst we’re all fighting
the Covid crisis, boats
are still coming to the UK
and it can’t be sustainable,
it’s unsustainable.
Dale?
From my point of view,
the UK already has a plethora
of impending prominent crises.
It’s got Scottish independence,
coronavirus, Brexit and Ijust
believe that the demonisation
of these desperate, vulnerable
people isjust a horrid distraction
from the Conservative government’s
failure on all of those fronts.
Helen?
Thank you.
As a front line clinician,
I see some of the most vulnerable
people in our society,
including people who
are here as refugees.
And the vast majority of them
need our support and our compassion
and as a civilised human being,
I feel deeply uncomfortable
about the thinly veiled racism
that is often wrapped up
in these dialogues.
So we are a civilised nation,
as others have said,
let’s behave in a civilised manner
to the most vulnerable
people around us.
0K, there’s a number
of questions being put tonight
so we’re going to move on.
Before I do, Ijust want to tell
you that we are looking for people
to join our virtual audience,
sadly virtual but it’s what we have
to do in these times.
Just like the people
we have here from Carlisle,
next week we will be in Coventry
and the week after that we are
going to be in Edinburgh.
So if you live in either
of those two cities
or thereabouts, do get in touch.
Go to the Question Time website,
you can fill in the form
there and think of a question
or an issue that you’re burning
to ask and let’s see if we can get
you on the programme.
It would be great to hear from you.
Right, let’s take our next question
now which is from Charlotte Tollman.
Hello.
So my question is, recently,
thousands of students have returned
to or have just started university.
But for students in Glasgow,
the virus has spread so quickly that
new students have been forced
to isolate in their
unfamiliar halls.
We’ve been lied to about the quality
of teaching, and Ifeel I’ve been
coaxed back to university away
from the safety of my
home in Cumbria, whilst
still paying full price.
There has been no regard
for my mental health and the only
concern that I feel has been is me
being part of the profit.
The money issue is bad enough
issue but what action
is the Government taking to protect
students’ mental health?
Charlotte’s at a
Scottish university.
David?
Yeah, I really feel for Charlotte.
I mean, obviously I have lots
of students in my own constituency
who have gone back to university
and I think...
So what can you do to help?
The first thing that we doing,
for example, is to try
and increase testing.
So we’ve now put in a walk
in testing Centre in Glasgow
and in St Andrews as well.
We are acknowledging this is not
the fault of young people.
Going to university is an incredibly
exciting thing for young people
and it’s a very difficult time
for them, as well.
But they can’t walk in if their
self—isolating, as thousands are.
At the moment, there’s
lots of guidance that’s being worked
up with the National Union
of Students, which has
certainly been welcomed.
We’ve given quite a lot of guidance
to the accommodation
providers as well.
It’s about understanding that
for students this is a very,
very difficult time and we are doing
absolutely everything
we can to support them,
in conjunction with the NUS.
And I do feel for Charlotte.
Hopefully we’ll try and get
through this as best as we can
and will looking to try and get
in a situation where students can
return at Christmas.
But the situation in Glasgow
is there’s no doubt it’s a perilous
situation it’s about
protecting people’s safety,
first their physical safety
but also their mental health
of students, as well.
It’s a very, very vulnerable time
for them and my heart goes out
to them and we’ll do our best
to support them.
Helen?
Look, my student days were some
of the most exciting
and rewarding of my life.
Are you, like everyone else,
feel the students who are in this
situation, but the period
of lockdown that is
being proposed is short.
It’s a couple of weeks,
and then a greater degree
of normality will return.
But of course all of life
is profoundly affected and Covid
isn’t going to be passed
in a matter of weeks.
We are here for the long haul.
We are into a second wave and,
indeed, a third and fourth wave
will come and we need to be prepared
for that and we cannot suspend
education for all that time.
I’m affiliated to the
University of Birmingham.
I know the huge efforts that
lecturers have been putting
in to prepare to do as much
and a high quality online
as possible, because nobody
wants this situation.
That Helen, Charlotte’s point...
I’m sorry to interrupt,
Charlotte’s point is critically
about the mental health of students
as much as anything.
0h, absolutely, and we need
to ensure students are mentored,
supported, they have great
communication and that basic
necessities are provided for them.
They can’t be the victims in this,
that’s really not helpful
because it’s not students felt that
they’re in this situation.
There’s an awful lot of blame
going on in some places, as well,
and I’m horrified to hear that.
I’ve seen worse behaviour
in older adults than
I have an youngsters, by large.
What would Labour do
differently when it comes
to Charlotte’s point
and I
can see you’ve got your hand up,
so I’m going to come
back to you in a moment.
When it comes to helping students,
particularly in regard to
their mental health,
students who are isolating
on their own in halls,
many of them for the first time.
So there’s two things
for me, firstly
the testing system and the tracing
system, crucially, tracing people
who have got the virus,
so they can isolate properly.
Making that system works
underpins get a better
scenario almost for every aspect
of our life and that goes
for students as well,
wherever they are.
Because if we can
have a proper system,
where people know that
they can have a test
and get the results back
in a
speedy way, that will help us
across every aspect of our life.
I have had constituents
have a test and not get
the results back for
five to seven days.
That is not acceptable
and it’s got to change.
Obviously, the office
of students and other bodies
are listening to what students
are saying and I know they want to
encourage universities to be very
responsive to the needs of students
and you know whilst we’ve all seen
on social media the examples where
that’s not been the case,
universities have got to be
responsive to their students needs
and the best ones I’m sure
there are lots of people in higher
education who would absolutely agree
what I’ve said.
One final point that Charlotte said
that is very important is about
students and mental health.
And we know that as
a country we have let
young people down in terms
of their mental health
for too long and you know,
as a Labour Party, we have
scrutinised the Government on this
for years now and I think that this
crisis has shown that
failure in sharp relief.
So whilst from opposition
it’s early days for us,
at the moment, but I know that
priority of having the principle of
that’s got to improve
will be part of how we listen
to what
students are going through new and
try to put policies in place that
will help them.
Since you have mentioned
mental health and I hope
you don’t mind me referring to this,
you have put your own mental health
out in the public domain and I
wondered if you wanted to
share that?
Well, I mean, you know as the shadow
ministerfor sport, I think
that sport is incredible for mental
health, for a really important
reason which is that physical
activity we know had a positive
impact on people’s mental health,
but when you’re doing sport, you get
the joy of being part of a team
as well and I know, I am sure
Charlotte and lots of other students
will be
missing some of that, and I think
once we’re able to get to more
normal times, I certainly have
found, in my own feelings ofjust
sort of unhappiness
and particularly around
body shape and ho image
that
body shape and body image that
being part of a sports team and big
shout out to the Westminster
football team and the Wirral
football team and their brilliant
coaching, Ijust know how brilliant
sport has been for my mental health.
Is it something that’s
helped you in particular?
I’ve really surprised this week
about how you know I wrote
this article for Grazia magazine
about it and how many people have
said, do you know what?
Ifeel the same,
I have never had much
confidence about my body shape
and actually sport has helped me.
It turns out I thought
I was alone in
this and I wasn’t.
So it’s been a good
thing in that regard.
There’s been a comment
from our audience.
Charlotte, you wanted
to come back in?
Ijust wanted to go back to
the first point in terms of people
saying that we only have to isolate
for two weeks and it’s not that big
a deal in terms of our education,
but it’s notjust if we get
coronavirus or are exposed to it,
it is the fact that we can’t join
sports teams if somebody gets Covid
in
training, or can’tjoin
sports teams in general.
Our whole life has gone on line
and I can’t mix outside my
household, because I’m
above the border.
This affects every aspect
of university life and I think to
minimise it down to
those two weeks is...
Quite almost patronising to us
and there’s been no clear guidance
and that is what we would like
tonight from you guys is when is the
next step coming.
I willjust go around the audience
a bit more if I may.
Gemma?
Good evening.
As a nurse in Cumbria
and as a mum, I think the
mental health of young
people is of paramount
importance at the moment.
But all I keep seeing is our
Government talk about practical
solutions and ploughing money
into this that and the other and
isolating people further.
But there actually
doesn’t seem to be any
clear strategy in this day and age
to support young people’s
mental health.
I mean, young people,
especially as Charlotte said, at
university, they’re isolated
from theirfamily, theirfriends,
they’re in new situations,
but the
Government never appears
to touch on mental
health and as we know
in the
whole of the UK mental health
provisions for young people are very
poor and you know are we going
the see an increase in the suicide
rate in young people,
because of the
Covid outbreak.
Catherine?
Hi there, Ijust wanted
to agree with what
Charlotte said and actually pick up
on a point where there is a degree
of cynicism I feel,
I have two children
in the north-east, one
of
whom is an 18—year—old
fresher, who has gone
to university expecting
a
very different life to the one
he has in Cumbria and actually has
found himself in halls of residence
in an eight—bedded flat by himself,
because everybody else
hasn’t turned up yet.
And they’re not entirely
sure when they will.
Soto minimise students’
experiences and say well,
it’s only a couple of weeks, they’ll
be able to cope, they have got
social networks, well
actually some of these
children haven’t at
the
moment and they’re away from home
for the first time and I am
concerned that actually even though
he has a sibling in the same city,
at the moment with their lockdown
they’re not meant to spend time with
each other, because they’re
in different households.
50 actually this isn’t
just a temporary, it is
young people they’ll
be OK in a few weeks.
I think we could see really
long—term impacts on children who
are going away for the first time in
different environments and different
cities where they don’t know people
and we haven’t really from the
university perspective put in that
kind of support that I would have
expected as a parent,
let alone as a mental
health practitioner.
June, I think you take
a rather different view?
What I was saying was that this
could be the new normal and we
all, whether we are students or not,
have to get our heads around this
situation and learn to adapt really.
I’m not belittling it, I have got
three children, thankfully they’re
the other side of the later 205,
so they have been through this
period and I just think as long
as you have
got a decent computer and I think
that is something the universities
could ensure and don’t assume
everybody that goes to university
has a decent computer,
but without a decent
computer that you ran jump
on
and off 2A hours a day,
as it suits you, you’re sort
of dead in the water.
But as long as the tutors, you know,
really work hard to get
everything online and make sure
everybody’s on board that needs to
be on board, I think
this could work.
It is such a sad time
for young people as students.
0K.
You know.
No thank for your point.
Stuart?
Charlotte’s original point
was important about the mental
health of nation.
But it is notjust about
the mental health of the
nation.
It is about the physical health
of those people who are not
Covid sufferers, who are not able
to get into hospitals at the moment.
Jeremy Hunt made the point yesterday
that there are 10 million people
waiting for appointments in
hospitals and they’re not able to
go there.
It’s the health of our children
in schools and universities
who are not getting
a proper education.
It is the health, dare I say it,
of business and what I
really worry about now is the cure
that we are currently putting our
country through actually worse
than the disease and do we not have
to come to a time where we now think
this is livelihoods versus lives.
And I don’t think we have had that
debate properly and I think we’re
going to find, as we come
into the autumn, we have a further
lockdown or potentially more
lockdowns, we come to the spring,
we have unemployment coming through,
dare I say it, we’ve got the hill,
whether it’s a good hill or a bad
hill about Brexit.
The time in the spring it
could be very difficult.
And if we just keep
locking people up and
don’t come to terms
with the
fact this illness is not going away.
So do you think should happen
in terms of universities?
I think we should actually
be more relaxed, we
should learn to live with the virus,
40,000 people have died, but let’s
ask the question and
Helen is the expert,
how many peopla, Helan,
in
the UK have died
exclusively of Covid?
Well, I mean we know that measures
we said it is about 43,000
have died of Covid.
We suspect there’s another
10,15,000 on top,
that’s the excess deaths.
But people are dying
all the time of lots of
diseases and we do know that there
are implications of the lockdown on
other health behaviours.
And we know there are
people out there who
haven’t come forward
with their cancers and I do worry
about the cancer gap.
And there is something really
serious to say, if you have
worrying symptoms, you’ve
got a lump, you’ve got
a strange bleeding problem,
please come forward.
The NHS is open for you,
it has been open and it
continues to be open
for
you, despite Covid.
I think there is some serious
things that we do need
to get better in terms
of our messaging to the public.
That’s my point, the
unintended consequence of
what we’re doing for this specific
illness may have much bigger knock
on effects that we haven’t even
thought about it and we need to be
thoughtful about it.
James?
Hi there.
Yeah, I can’t of don’t understand
the student situation,
because my daughter started
reception class this year, which
was great.
But she brings home 27 households
into my house every day.
So you know the younger
age group are meant
to be asymptomatic,
or
carry the virus, but don’t have
symptoms, but I think the comment
just made there, we do need to learn
to live with this virus now and all
our children at school and every
day my daughter brings home 27
households into my house.
And there’s no control over that.
And if you think of
all the children that
are in school, secondary schools,
primary schools, you know there’s no
control over this virus any more.
We just do not know
who has it and who
is bringing it into each
other’s household.
Gordon?
With the situation
in universities are we
simplyjust kicking
the can down the road?
I feel we shouldn’t lockdown special
age groups of people that
tend not to suffer too
badly with the disease.
I know anybody suffering
with it is terrible, but I
think we are just kicking the can
further down the road.
Grant, Charlotte said,
we have been lied to
about the quality of teaching,
I feel I have been coaxed back to
university, away from the safety
of my home in Cumbria, paying full
price, with no regard
for my mental health,
the only concern being profit.
Has she got a point there
that the universities and the
Government have not been straight
with students about what it was
going to be like?
First of all, I feel
hugely for Charlotte.
We can’t expect young
people just to put
their lives completely on hold.
We have to try to get
the universities
up and running again, education
running again and that is by and
large working.
But Charlotte’s points have
been big questions of
debate in my household this week,
because my eldest has just got back
to university last week and one of,
he lives in a house of four, and one
of the others has tested positive,
so they’re all under self—isolation
and going through that sort
of you know point in time
where we have come here,
we have started to study,
we are now having to do
that through computers,
but in a different city.
In terms of Charlotte’s question,
when she says she has been coaxed
back without any regard
for her mental health and we have
heard many students say we weren’t
told it
would be like this.
We thought we’d get some
online learning, but you
would get learning face to face
and they’re not getting that.
It is because of the
circumstances and no
one’s got a sort of
magic solution to this.
We have got to be up front
and honest about it.
Coronavirus is something
that we are going to have
to live with.
I hear what Stuart says
and others, but the reality is
that although it probably won’t kill
most younger people, it can
certainly carry and spread
it and eventually it
hurts older people.
That’s exactly what we’re
seeing in the figures now
in hospital, in admissions.
The 300 and odd people
who are on ventilators tonight, the
2,500 people who are in
hospital with coronavirus.
It will spread.
So we do have to keep taking those
measures but, you know,
as Charlotte and others pointed out,
we can’tjust put
lives on hold forever.
So we have to try and make this work
as the new normal for the time
being and it does mean
that there will be probably
a combination of remote
learning in situations,
but there are lots of university
cases, if you’re training
to be, I don’t know...
Physical things, where you have
to have a degree of with lecturer
time because it can
be something that...
Medicine, for example,
where you have to be there.
So, no, look, I don’t think people
were sort of coaxed back.
Universities are autonomous
organisations, but I think it
would be wrong to ask or expect
students not to return to study
and not to try to get universities
back and I would challenge anyone
who says that we
shouldn’t be trying.
Charlotte’s point was maybe
the universities were not quite
as open about what it might
have been like.
Let me just put a question to David.
Nicola Sturgeon, I was listening
to Nicole Sturgeon yesterday,
would not commit herself to students
at Scottish universities
going home for Christmas.
So is there still a chance that
students like Charlotte,
she comes from Carlisle
but she is at university
in Scotland, may not be able
to go home for Christmas,
is that still the case?
We are certainly very hopeful that
students can get back for Christmas
and if we ran make that happen,
we will, but...
But you are not committing to it,
maybe they can isolate
for two weeks beforehand,
it’s still a possibility
they may have to stay
in university for Christmas?
We are in a situation,
Fiona, where in Glasgow,
hundreds of students have tested
positive the coronavirus.
These are young people who are using
shops in the West End of Glasgow,
potentially mixing around
with other people.
The most important thing at this
stage for us is to try and contain
this virus and that’s why,
on a short—term basis,
we’ve put those lockdown
procedures in place.
I get that but staying at Christmas,
staying at university at Christmas
is still on the table, potentially?
We are very hopeful that people can
get home for Christmas.
Christmas is a long
way off at the moment.
The most important thing
is controlling this virus and any
politician worth their salt
will have that as a number one
priority at the moment.
Let’s take another question,
from Jonathan Donald.
Hi.
Have the localised lockdowns
and restrictions been totally
ineffective in slowing the spread
of the virus and has the inability
of the UK Government to communicate
the messages effectively
contributed to some extent
to noncompliance amongst certain
individuals within society?
Well, Jonathan’s directing
his question initially
to the UK Government,
so, Grant, I’m going to ask you.
There’s also some talk now,
as I understand it,
about simplifying the message
with a traffic light
system, is that true?
Well, first of all, no,
I don’t think it’s been ineffective,
to answer your question directly.
Looking at examples, like Luton,
for example, or Leicester,
where the numbers were very high.
Local lockdowns, which aren’t
the full lockdowns we all knew
at the beginning of this,
were put in place and we saw
the numbers come down and, actually,
come down to now what are levels
which mean they can come
out of that process.
So, I think it’s helped a lot.
It may also be the case,
and the Chief Medical Officer,
Chris Whitty, has been saying this,
that by having lockdowns in specific
areas, as we did in Luton
and Leicester and now
in the north—west and parts
of the north—east, we are preventing
the spread, preventing the whole
country from having to go into full
lockdown and then able
to unlock those areas.
So that’s the hope.
Simplification, you’ll have to wait
for, and I understand the point but,
actually, wherever
you are in the country,
if you hear that your area
is in a lockdown area,
it’s very quick and very easy
and we just demonstrated it before
coming on the programme,
to go to gov.uk and you can simply
look up where you live and see
exactly what the rules are.
So, they are easy to follow,
you can look them up.
I think it’s very important...
It can’t be that easy to follow
if the Prime Minister
got them wrong himself.
Well, everyone mis—spea ks.
No, sure, I’m not trying
to make a cheap point,
I’m simply saying it can’t be that
easy to understand if even the man
in charge can’t get it right.
He was talking about the rule of six
because that is generally the rule
throughout the country.
But it is true, in an area that
has a local lockdown,
additional rules will apply,
which generally mean
you can’t mix with other
people in your own home,
in your garden, in
restaurants and pubs.
But you should check
the rules on gov.uk locally.
But to answer the question,
yes, we do believe that
from an epidemiological point
of view, it is doing something
and therefore worth pursuing,
and it has stopped us,
thus far, from having
to go into a second full
lockdown, which is surely
an everybody’s interests.
And, David, in terms
of communicating messages
effectively and noncompliance
among some individuals,
what’s this issue with the SNP?
Well, it’s an MP who is
no longer an SNP Whip
and for very good reason.
I’ve got to say I’m pretty
furious with the behaviour
of Margaret Ferrier...
Do you just want to explain
to viewers who might not
know what she’s done?
U nfortu nately, yes.
One of my former colleagues had
tested positive for coronavirus
and used a train over the course
of this week, quite rightly,
she’s lost the whip.
So, just to be clear,
she suspected she had
symptoms and took a test.
While she was waiting
for the results, she went down
to Westminster to debate coronavirus
regulations, having broken
them herself and then
when she did test positive,
she went on the train
back to Scotland?
Yes, and it’s utterly inexcusable
and it’s right that she’s lost
the whip for that because...
Do you think she should resign?
She herself called for
Dominic Cummings to resign.
She’s lost the whip,
do you think she should resign?
I certainly think her position
is untenable, to be honest.
So you think she should resign?
You’re asking people to follow very,
very strict public health guidance,
and if a member of Parliament can’t
do that, then they’ve got
to reflect upon the position.
So let me hear it from you then,
you think her position’s untenable,
do you think she should resign?
I find it very difficult to say
to my constituents who lives
in the neighbouring constituency
to Rutherglen and Hamilton
that her actions were excusable
and so I think she does have
to reflect on her position.
You think she should resign?
I don’t think her position
is tenable and she should resign.
Gordon, you are nodding
your head along to that?
Yeah, I think if she definitely
called for Dominic’s resignation,
I do think he should have resigned,
then I do think her
job is untenable.
We can’t expect the population
of the country to follow
the guidelines, even if they’re not
quite sure what they are,
when the people in charge,
who make policy, who appear
on the media, simply defy belief
and even though she knew she had
the virus and she had a positive
test, she actually got on a train.
I can’t believe it.
Stupid.
Gary?
Just on a lighter note,
I’m starting to wonder
with all the confusion around Covid
rules and regulations
whether we need a Friday
night because to replace
Have I Got News For You
hosted by BorisJohnson?
LAUGHTER.
Of course, he used to host
Have I Got News For You quite
some time ago now.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, Stuart, Jonathan’s question
is about have localised lockdowns
and restrictions been ineffective
in controlling the spread
of the virus and has
the inability of the Government,
in his view, the UK Government,
to communicate the message
effectively contributed
to noncompliance?
What’s interesting is that
when you look at polls,
the most recent poll looking
at confidence, clarity
from the UK Government
about the clarity of their message,
confidence in that is very low.
When it comes to the Scottish
Government, confidence
about that particular thing,
in terms of clarity
and communication,
is generally pretty high.
But nonetheless, on both sides
of the border, we see lockdowns
and infections rising.
So, I’m wondering, does it
make any difference?
Well, my personal
view is it doesn’t.
If you’re asking me the question.
What I find quite comical is,
listen, this is a very serious
illness that we are facing but it
isn’t the end of life on Earth.
We are going to have to live
with it, as the Chancellor has said,
as Grant has just said.
The second thing is that it’s
incomprehensible that in a country
with 50—60 million people we’ve
actually got four different rules.
So I can go to a pub in London
tonight and I have to leave by 10pm.
But I can go to Belfast
and I can stay until 10:30.
I can be with some friends
in London, six, but I can’t
do that in Scotland.
Why can’t we have uniform rules?
Across the UK, which would make it
much simpler for everybody?
But the real issue for me is one
I tried to raise before,
is I’m not remotely poking a stick
at our audience here,
but I’m quite interested
that we are sitting here talking
about lockdown, lockdown, lockdown.
Charlotte’s question
about mental health.
Nobody is talking about
the UK plc’s health.
We did last week.
We may not be talking about it right
now at this minute, Stuart,
and I’m sorry you weren’t there.
You may be weren’t watching but we
absolutely did talk about that.
All our futures and livelihoods
depend on us getting back to some
sort of normality and living
with this crisis and
that the real issue.
But the health of the workforce
is an important input to that.
I mean, Ijust disagree with
what you said before about there’s
lives versus livelihoods.
That’s not right, it’s not one
thing versus the other
because if you haven’t got a healthy
workforce, then the economy
will not be successful.
50, actually, being able
to isolate the virus
is the most important thing,
notjust the people’s health,
absolutely crucial though that is,
that is absolutely vital
for our economy.
But as we know, it was pointed out
by one of our participants
this evening, we can’t
actually put the...
All you do, as the gentleman said,
is kick the can down the street.
You can suppress it here, it pops up
there, it’s like a balloon.
And you can help businesses be more
and more Covid safe.
That’s what lots of businesses
are doing quite successfully...
Alison, you’re quite right.
Give us testing at the door of every
business once a week.
Give us a test and trace system that
works, so people can have security.
Give us the security — Grant Shapps
is the Minister of Transport...
Are you listening, Grant,
are you listening?
When we can get on the
tube and it’s safe.
I’ve been on the tube on London
every single day this
week, nobody’s using it.
It’s got to be fine.
Buses are not being used.
The road system is completely
clogged up because we’ve told people
wherever possible don’t share a car,
go on your own, except you can’t
travel anywhere because the roads
are alljammed up.
It’s nonsense that we have to be
able to find a way through this
problem but I understand...
Stuart, that’s exactly what we’re
doing with these local
lockdowns, which you are also
against which is curious
because if you look at the rate
across the country it’s...
I don’t know, 13 cases
per 100,000 in the south—west.
But it’s over 100 in other places.
It’s a nonsense to say...
If you want to apply
the same rules everywhere,
we will end up in a position
where none of us can do anything.
What we are trying to do,
and I think arguably successfully
now, is get the economy moving,
which it is, but still protect
people’s lives, as well.
The economy’s not moving.
We have to carry on doing
that until the cavalry
of a scientific solution to this,
a vaccine or whatever,
comes over the horizon.
Until then, we have to do
what actually works.
We know these local lockdowns,
to return to the question,
actually do bring the rates down.
Now, Stuart, I’m sorry to interrupt
but you want to talk about UK plc.
We talked about it last
week and there’s lots
of people in our audience...
I will shut up.
No, because I know they want
to talk about it tonight.
So, let’s hear from some of them.
Victoria, you have your hand up, I’m
going to come to you in a second.
Let’s hearfrom James Hill,
and after that, John Miller.
Hi.
Yeah, the whole mixed
messages thing.
I mean, when you have scientific
advisors that are coming out
with comments like "Hospital
admissions are steady"
but "On a rapid incline".
Well, which one is it?
Is it steady or is it rapid?
And these people are advising
the Government and then we get mixed
messages from the Government
at the moment that are saying
what we should and shouldn’t do.
I had full faith in
the scientific side of things,
up until the beginning of this week,
when they came out and started using
all this terminology and coming out
with comments like that.
The public don’tjust know to go
left or right with a lot of these
restrictions and rules.
James, you have a
restaurant, haven’t you?
I’ve got two restaurants.
You have two restaurants,
forgive me.
Not one but two.
Now, how is the pandemic
affecting you at the moment?
Obviously, I assume business
is down but in terms
of bookings for the future,
Christmas, say?
We just don’t know
what to do for December.
We don’t know if we
should keep our staff.
We’ve got...
Normally at this time of year,
I have two thirds of my Christmas
bookings in, I have large companies
who use one of my restaurants.
They have their Christmas
parties there.
I have no Christmas bookings at all
right now and it’s a worrying,
daunting experience,
going into this
period for our trade.
Ijust don’t understand how
the newJob Support Scheme is meant
to help our trade at the moment.
We have no guidance on the next
three months at all,
of what our trade should do,
what we should advise our customers.
Do we get Christmas party
menus out, do we not get
Christmas party menus out?
And there is just no
guidance whatsoever for our
trade at the moment.
I’m not saying the Government
hadn’t done wonders so far
with the economy, with the packages
we’ve had, the furlough scheme
for staff, the grants
we’ve had, brilliant.
I can’t deny that.
But moving forward now,
we’ve got six months ahead of us
where we are going to lose so much
of the hospitality trade
because of uncertainty.
John?
Well, I agree with James.
I have a hotel as well as
a restaurant and in the hotel,
we caterfor weddings
and wedding guests.
Now just last week,
we were allowed 30 wedding
guests and overnight,
it was so funny, I listened to Grant
there and he said everything should
be taken locally and
individually, yeah?
And all of a sudden,
they put a blanket and said no
weddings are only 15.
I can do the same in my restaurant
that can take 120 people,
Covid safe, with two metres apart,
yet he will not look at anything
at all that is ideal for individual
restaurants at all.
Theyjust put a blanket
ban and I don’t know...
I was actually out
on the Saturday night.
I kicked everybody out at ten
o’clock and they had a street party.
They had a street party outside?
Yeah, they had a street party.
They all gathered outside
and they had a street party,
to take the beer home and went
somewhere, like a party outside
or to people’s houses,
yet they’ve been already
in a Covid safe environment.
This is what the ten
o’clock rule does.
Victoria...
We are a tourism business,
we have already lost our Christmas.
So what is your business?
We are a tea room, gift
shop, informs centre for
Hadrian’s Well, we rely
heavily on visitors.
We have obviously had no visitors.
Our Christmas, our version
of Christmas is from April through
to, well, obviously basically
you knowJune, July, August.
We have already lost our business.
Our profit for the entire year.
And we have had to
temporarily close until
March next year.
I really don’t think that
anybody understands what
it’s like to lose your business.
And the impact.
And I don’t really think that any
of the politicians get it.
They have never run anything.
They don’t understand it.
They’re all being paid.
They’re sitting you know
receiving their pay every month, but
they don’t know what it’s like to be
in a stressful environment and you
know I’m not alone.
There is three million
people who haven’t had any
support, we have had
a little bit of support.
But we seem to be left high and dry.
What do you do when you don’t have
any revenue coming in,
how do you pay, how do
you sustain your business?
And yet we are just classed
by the Government as not
viable.
But we are viable.
We had a successful
business for ten years.
And only through Covid have we had
no visitors and therefore you know
no revenue and we
arejust cast aside.
As James was saying, we can lose
Christmas, what is anybody
going to do about that?
Does anybody really care?
Are we expendable?
We are the backbone of the country —
small businesses.
And we are described
as being the backbone of
the country.
But we are just going to be
left new high and dry.
All right.
I have had to close.
You know my staff,
I have had to make
redundant.
This has devastated me personally.
And yet everybody’s just sitting
here thinking about you
know, what?
They’ll just move on.
But how can we move on?
What can we do?
What is anybody going
to do to help us.
I should point out, a number
of politicians have and do
run businesses, I know Grant
has been one of them.
Helen, I know I have got
to come to you, I want to
come to Chris, you had your hand up.
If people did what they were being
asked to do, it would
solve the problem.
End of.
We wouldn’t have
increasing numbers of
people going down with the disease.
People are not isolating.
They’re not social distancing.
As was evidenced when
John let them out of
his her that night.
So you know, take responsibility.
Follow the rules.
And let’s at least give
them a chance to work.
Helen you have been trying to get
into the conversation.
I would certainly like to
echo that last point.
The science here is actually
quite straight forward.
Now we understand coronavirus,
it is behaving very predictably.
Viruses do what viruses
do and spread from
person—to—person and
the best metaphor I
can think of.
Think of a bottle of pop
that’s been shaken.
You start to unscrew
the top, it comes out.
You have to put the top back on.
And if you’re going
to live with this
pressurised system, you’ve
to release a little bit at a time if
you’re going to deal with it.
Then you can deal with
it as it bubbles out.
That is where local lockdowns
and following the hands, face
distance and space, test,
trace and isolate have to come out.
But you can’t miss out
any of those steps.
Every single one of us has
a responsibility here and now.
And it is absolutely
right that we need our
economy working, we need people
working, work is good for health and
health is good for work.
These things go hand in hand.
So we can’t think
of them in isolation.
So we need clarity of messaging,
consistency of messaging and I get
intensely frustrated
that Hadrian’s Wall
and Off-1’s Dyke are seen
as
some sort of barrier
to viruses, they’re not.
We need the same messages
across the country, the
science isn’t different.
We should however
recognise high areas of
infection and low areas
of infection do require
differences, but we don’t
require differences
in
four nations.
Please can we get that
clarity done and let’s get
together as a nation now.
This is a serious
illness, it kills and it
leaves a huge proportion of people
ill for a long, long time.
When they’re ill,
they’re not working and
contributing to society either.
So that’s covered a few
things there, Fiona.
And Helen, when you hearJohn
talking about the fact and we have
seen stuff online about people
getting together and having a party
after 10 o’clock, what does that
make you feel as a GP and someone
representing a health
care professional?
It’s so frustrating,
it’s sad it is frustrating, because
I know people fundamentally
want to do the right thing.
But this pressurised
system is a problem.
There is pressure and
people want release.
But the release of everyone ending
out on the street at the same
time is not helping.
So I’m sad and I’m frustrated
and Ijust wanted to
reiterate the messages, because
the science is really simple.
This virus isn’t getting
less virulent, it’s
not getting milder, it’sjust
as deadly as it was on day one.
But we are testing more,
so we are finding
more of the milder cases.
Please, please, follow the rules.
Look after one another.
And we will get through this.
But it’s not going
to be over quickly.
We’ve got a long haul ahead of us.
We have got a few minutes left
and I want to get one more
question in from Gordon McGregor.
Do you think the
Government should help
help football clubs financially
when their players are still
receiving massive salaries,
compared to an
average person’s wage?
Right, well Alison,
Carlisle United FC, which
plays in League Two,
is warning it faces
a 1.2 million short fall
and
I’m thinking about obviously
you have got Merseyside that’s going
into, or the Liverpool area that’s
going into restrictions, that is
going to affect the clubs there too.
Yeah, football clubs are in a really
bad situation and you know we heard
the pointjust about new
players’ wages, which is one
side of it.
Which we have needed to regulate
better and have a better
system of governance in our national
game for many years and the virus
has shown this in sharp relief.
Do you think the
Premier League should
dip into their pockets?
I think the Premier
League have got to
contribute, but I think
it’s bigger than that.
The Government promised
in their 2019 manifesto a fan—led
review of football governance
and the minister says he wants to
include finances as well.
Labour agree with this and I
have been banging on about football
finances and governance since I was
first elected as a
member of Parliament?
2010.
That’s a lot of talk
about football in ten years.
So, what would Labour do now?
We have written to
the Government offering
our principles for reviewing
the regulations to make it better.
Right now, if I was
the ministerfor sport
now, I would be getting
the Premier League, the EFL
and all the parties round the table
and say, can we all
stick to the principle that no
football supporter in this country
should lose a much—loved sports
club, just because of the virus.
Now we know that the finances
of football have been, shall I say,
challenging for a long time anyway.
So we have got to separate out
the changes that we need for the
medium and the long—term
viability of the game.
Which is a way of protecting clubs
in the short—term, if it is just the
virus that will tip them over.
Because I’ve seen you know whether
it’s what happened with Macclesfield
recently or what happened with Bury,
I have seen how it impacts people,
supporters when clubs go under.
It’s part of your identity.
It’s who you are and football
supporters deserve
much better than they’re
getting at the moment.
David?
I support a League One club
in Scotland which is
not players on massive salaries
and I think one of things
that is really important for people
to remember is,
yes, there are big football clubs
out there, players that are on big
wages, but for the vast majority
of communities, it’s small clubs,
small teams that are really
struggling at
the moment.
But one of the points that
I was making in the House of
Commons this week to the Government
as well it is about being mindful,
in my own constituents
at Celtic football club,
the biggest football
club in Scotland.
L111:
But it is about making sure that
peopla
people remember there is a local
economic aspect. A 60,000 seater
stadium. What would you do to help
stadium. what would you do to help
the clubs
stadium. What would you do to help
the clubs lower down? We need to
look at the financial support that
is offered and the package that was
brought forward by the Treasury is
unadequate. I don’t think Rishi
Sunak can get to Christmas without
Sunak ran get to Christmas without
looking at the
Sunak can get to Christmas without
looking at the packages, what he has
offered is it not going to cut it
for communities and clubs and people
for communities and clubs and peopla
who are
for communities and clubs and people
who are struggling. Stuart, are you
a footy fan? Yes, I’m a
a footy fan? Yes, I’m 3 Spurs fan.
a footy fan? Yes, I’m a Spurs fan.
There is a
a footy fan? Yes, I’m 3 Spurs fan.
There is a deal in place and the
argument is about the access of
foreign players coming in. It is a
three-way
three—way trade off. If they let
three-way trade off. If they let
more foreign
three—way trade off. If they let
more foreign players in, they will
give the money to the EFL. But the
industry needs to help itself.
Because that gentleman said, the
peopla at
people at the top end have got a
disproportionate amount of the
income and the revenues.
income and the revenues. Gem? Our
[oral team
local team have suffered, but they
[oral team have suffered, but they
have kept
local team have suffered, but they
have kept most of the money that
people have paid for their season
tickets and they’re allowing their
tickets and therre allowing their
fans to
tickets and they’re allowing their
fans to watch it online. So they’re
fans to watch it online. So therre
maintaining
fans to watch it online. So they’re
maintaining some of the income and
giving something back to if fans.
giving something back to iffans.
which
giving something back to if fans.
Which is good. It is a positive
which is good. It is a positive
step. Halon,
Which is good. It is a positive
step. Helen, you’re nodding? Yeah
step. Helan, you’re nodding? Yeah
this is a
step. Helen, you’re nodding? Yeah
this is a much wider issue than
football clubs and football should
support football, the richer clubs
should support the other clubs, but
we need to think of rugby and
we need to think of mgby and
cricket
we need to think of rugby and
cricket grounds and the facilities
that are suffering. There are other
sports out there, so let’s think
about them all. And Grant, the
Government has promised an emergency
grant to the fifth tier of football,
what about the rest of it. Will the
Government pitch in or leave
Government pitch in or leave to it
the Premier League. The league has a
lot to give, Carlisle are playing
lot to give, (“artisla are playing
Barrow
lot to give, Carlisle are playing
Barrow on Saturday. You have been
swotting! They will need to be able
to carry on playing, as has been
said and we are looking at things
like how you can use technology in
like how you ran use technology in
football
like how you can use technology in
football to help the clubs and
audiences. But it is something that
has been hard and I think the
Premier League is a part of the
solution, as well as Government and
the taxpayer. Gordon, this was your
question, what is your view? I think
that the football clubs should be in
a way, if you can demonstrate you
a way, if you ran demonstrate you
ran by social
a way, if you can demonstrate you
can by social distancing you can
ran by social distancing you ran
stop the
can by social distancing you can
stop the spread of the virus, the
stadiums have all seated numbers and
I think they should be allowed a
certain amount of supporters to
watch the game and that would be
alleviate some of the pressure for
the fans and the clubs. But the
governing bodies should get together
and I don’t think the Government
should be involved. I also think the
players have a responsibility as
well. Some of these players, in the
lower league ts they’re not earning
lower league ts therre not earning
as much,
lower league ts they’re not earning
as much, when we were furloughed and
people were living off 80% of their
people were living off 8096 of their
wages, some
people were living off 80% of their
wages, some of them could live off
101: of
10% of their wages. I do think it
1096 of their wages. I do think it
needs to
10% of their wages. I do think it
needs to be all the governing bodies
need to get together. I don’t think
the Government should be involved.
Because it is not
Because it is notjust football,
Because it is not just football,
there is
Because it is notjust football,
there is other sports and where they
ran they
can they should help the lower
ran they should help the lower
dubs.
can they should help the lower
clubs. That is my opinion. Grant it
dubs. That is my opinion. Grant it
is a
haum
dubs. That is my opinion. Grant it
is a rare thing
clubs. That is my opinion. Grant it
is a rare thing where people tell
is a rare thing where peopla tell
you the
is a rare thing where people tell
you the Government shouldn’t be
involved. Enjoy that moment while it
involved. Enjoy that moment whila it
lasts. The point
involved. Enjoy that moment while it
lasts. The point about letting the
lasts. The point about latting the
spectators in
lasts. The point about letting the
spectators in the stadium, that is
something we were hoping to move
towards, but we have this you know
absolute desire to have schools and
work back and we can’t if the R rate
is above 1 do other discretionary
things. when
things. When we get it down, we can
things. when we get it down, we ran
do the
things. When we get it down, we can
do the other things that will help
the clubs and other sports. Our hour
is up. I see some of you have your
hands up, we have run out of time.
hands up, we have mn out of time.
Our question, you
hands up, we have run out of time.
Our question, you came from Carlisle
Our question, you came from (“artisla
and next
Our question, you came from Carlisle
and next week we’re in Coventry and
we are going to be
we are going to bejoined by the
we are going to be joined by the
former
we are going to bejoined by the
formerfinance minister
former finance minister of Greece.
And an ex-Tory
And an ex—Tory MP, Michael Portillo.
And an ex-Tory MP, Michael Portillo.
And the
And an ex—Tory MP, Michael Portillo.
And the week after that we are in
Edinburgh with
Edinburgh with Kate Forbes. If you
live in those areas, get in touch
and get involved in the debate and
apply by going to the question time
web—site. Adrian Chiles and chests
web-site. Adrian Chiles and chests
are on five
web—site. Adrian Chiles and chests
are on five live extra time.
are on five live extra time. You can
are on five live extra time. You ran
get in touch. But
are on five live extra time. You can
get in touch. But for now, thank you
to the panel. Helen for
to the panel. Helen forjoining us
to the panel. Helan for joining us
down
to the panel. Helen for joining us
down the
to the panel. Helen forjoining us
down the line. And of course thank
you to our virtual audience of
(artiste.
Carlisle. And thank you for
you to our virtual audience of
Carlisle. And thank you forjoining
(artisla. And thank you for joining
us as
Carlisle. And thank you forjoining
us as well. Until next time,
bye-bye-
I lost half of my family
because of some person’s hate.
BBC TWO searches with families
looking for justice.
We’re investigating a crime
because our government isn’t.
We want to know why this happened.
Your father has something
to tell you.
# I don’t wanna lose... #
No—one’s perfect.
I thought she was.
Unless, of course, you want to
tell me something I don’t know.
To me, it seems like you want
your life. That’s not what...
I know, but I’m saying go do it.
Don’t fall off the wagon,
because Maya needs you.
It’s election night.
That’s the moment where he realised,
"Oh, my gosh.
This is really about to happen."
President Trump is a star,
he’s an icon.
He hates for anyone
to get more shine than him.
At first,
Tmmp is maybe a little uncertain,
but I think he rediscovered that his
inner voice was the right voice.
He called me a liar, and I said,
"I won’t be bullied any more."
From reality TV star
to Leader of the Free World.
The inside story
of the last four years.
Sarah! That’s Edie.
This is Bella.
Pharrell. Lily.
Nicola.
Caitlin. My son.
It’s my girlfriend.
My husband. My brother.
My wife—to—be.
He was a miracle. Made my heart
beat. Been going out for two years.
He’s the heir to my throne.
Hejust grew on me. She’s my life.
why don’t you have a picture of me?
Erm...
Just the way that she says things
are funny! She’s amazing.
He’s just been there for
every pivotal moment of my life.
Protect YOUR loved ones.
Get the app.
50, Chris, Adam isn’t
here but you are.
Yeah, and it’s great to be back,
not least because usually
when Adam’s on holiday,
lots of stuff happens.
And, actually, today,
on Thursday as we record,
there’s been rather a lot of news.
There’s been a lot of news and it’s
been a busy old week.
We’ve had a slew of regulations,
millions more people now living
under limited lockdowns.
Unfortunately, still the spread
of the disease, although a story
today that it might be slowing
a little bit.
But also this week,
the return of satire.
Yes.
What did you say
this show is called?
The name, or the nomine
to the Romans, little Latin
pun, is Spitting Image.
Spitting Scrimmage?
Spitting Image.
Spitting Cribbage?
It a sketch show with puppet
caricatures of real people
and it can be rather nasty.
Puppets?
That is the very most moronic
thing I’ve ever heard.
My puppet is going to be the best
puppet and I love it.
LAUGHTER.
The return of Spitting Image,
and a bit later on we’ll be talking
to the voice behind both of those
characters who’s been involved
with creating the show.
And for a blast of nostalgia,
we’ve got Katya back to talk Brexit.
We have!
So welcome to a little bit
of Brexitcast, this week’s Newscast.
Newscast.
Newscast from the BBC.
So, it’s Laura this
week at Westminster.
And it’s Chris, glad to be
back at Westminster,
sitting in for Adam, who’s away.
So, there has been, this week,
number one, lots of confusion